docs/ConstEval.md, before:

# FerroPhase Const Evaluation (AST)

Const evaluation now operates directly on the typed AST. The interpreter runs in
const mode over the same structures used by runtime execution and backend
lowerings, requesting types lazily as it evaluates expressions.

```
Source → LAST → AST → ASTᵗ → (Const Evaluation) → ASTᵗ′
```

- `ASTᵗ` is the canonical AST annotated with types by the Algorithm W inferencer.
- Const evaluation mutates the AST when necessary (constant folding, generated
  declarations, intrinsic rewrites) and returns `ASTᵗ′`. The interpreter can
  infer missing types on demand and registers any generated items with the
  incremental typer.
- `ASTᵗ′` is the authoritative programme for all downstream stages (HIRᵗ, MIR,
  LIR, transpilers).

## Const Block Semantics

```rust
const RESULT: i32 = {
    let x = 10;
    let y = 20;
    x + y
};
```

- Blocks execute during compilation using the AST interpreter in const mode.
- Evaluation observes principal types (`expr.ty`) inferred earlier.
- Intrinsics route through the shared registry and consult the
  `TypeQueryEngine` without synthesising intermediate representations.
- Structural edits (new structs, impls, generated functions) update the AST and
  promote any provisional `mut type` tokens to concrete entries.

### Compile-time Generation (overview)

Const evaluation may synthesize runtime code based on compile-time data. The
language provides dedicated keywords for quoting and splicing code, and a
convenience macro for emission. See `docs/Quoting.md` for full syntax and
semantics of `quote`, `splice`, and `emit!`.

### Advanced Patterns

```rust
const DEBUG_CONFIG: Config = {
    let mut cfg = Config::new();

    if cfg!(debug_assertions) {
        cfg.log_level = LogLevel::Debug;
        cfg.enable_tracing = true;
    }

    cfg
};
```

```rust
const STRUCT_INFO: StructInfo = {
    StructInfo {
        size: sizeof!(Point),
        field_count: field_count!(Point),
        has_z: hasfield!(Point, "z"),
    }
};
```

```rust
const GENERATED: Type = {
    struct GeneratedPoint { x: f64, y: f64 }

    if ENABLE_3D {
        struct GeneratedPoint { z: f64 }
    }

    impl GeneratedPoint {
        fn magnitude(&self) -> f64 {
            (self.x * self.x + self.y * self.y).sqrt()
        }
    }

    GeneratedPoint
};
```

## Evaluation Pipeline

1. **Type foundation**
   - Parse and normalise the AST, then initialize the incremental type
     environment (predeclare items, prepare query hooks).
   - The interpreter requests type info as needed, using the same Algorithm W
     solver, and can resolve missing symbols by materialising const-generated
     items.

2. **Const execution**
   - Build dependency order from the typed AST (const items, const blocks,
     generated symbols).
   - Execute blocks using the AST interpreter in const mode.
   - Promote `mut type` tokens and persist structural edits.

3. **Commit**
   - Merge evaluated values back into the AST.
   - Emit diagnostics using the shared `DiagnosticManager`.
   - Persist `.ast-eval` artefacts when `--save-intermediates` is enabled.

## Emission and Quoting

For emission and quoting/splicing semantics (context, captures, control flow,
diagnostics), see `docs/Quoting.md`. Const evaluation executes those operations
and commits the resulting `ASTᵗ′` but does not redefine their behaviour here.

## Quoting and Splicing (pointer)

- `quote` captures code as a hygienic AST value (compile-time only).
- `splice` inserts a previously quoted fragment into the current AST.
- Both contribute to `ASTᵗ′` during const evaluation.

Full details and examples: `docs/Quoting.md`.

Use `emit!` for simple “write this block into the runtime body.” Use
`quote`/`splice` when you need to treat code as data (store, transform, compose
fragments) before insertion. See `docs/Quoting.md` for full semantics.

## Determinism and Staging

- All const expressions and structural edits must be acyclic. The interpreter
  evaluates const items/blocks in a topologically sorted order derived from
  their dependencies (names and types they reference).
- An emission or splice cannot reference results from a later stage; such
  cross‑stage references produce a compile‑time diagnostic.
- Repeated evaluation with identical inputs yields identical `ASTᵗ′` snapshots.

## Diagnostics

- Cycle or cross‑stage reference during const evaluation → error with a cycle
  report.
- Illegal side effects or capability violations during const execution →
  compile‑time diagnostics from the interpreter.

## Comparison

| Aspect             | Const Block (ASTᵗ)               | Regular Code                  |
|--------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Execution time     | Compile time                     | Runtime                       |
| Allowed functions  | Pure / const-compatible          | All                           |
| Structural edits   | Written into ASTᵗ′               | N/A                           |
| Scope              | Block-local                      | Module/function               |
| Type information   | Inferred AST annotations          | Runtime reflection (if any)   |
| Failure handling   | Compile-time diagnostics         | Runtime errors/exceptions     |

## Artefacts

With `--save-intermediates`, const evaluation writes the post-eval snapshot as
`*.ast-eval`. Downstream tooling will consume this snapshot directly once the
new typed HIR/MIR pipeline is reinstated.

## Summary

- Const evaluation and runtime interpretation share the same AST interpreter with
  different configuration flags.
- The typed AST is the single source of truth; THIR is no longer produced.
- Intrinsic handling and type queries operate through shared resolver/query
  infrastructure.

Commit message:

feat: add RawPtr type and type evaluation hook for enhanced type handling

docs/ConstEval.md, after:

# FerroPhase Const Evaluation (AST)

Const evaluation now operates directly on the typed AST. The interpreter runs in
const mode over the same structures used by runtime execution and backend
lowerings, requesting types lazily as it evaluates expressions. When a type
expression requires execution (e.g., a type-level function), the typer can ask
the interpreter to evaluate it through the type-eval bridge.

```
Source → LAST → AST → ASTᵗ → (Const Evaluation) → ASTᵗ′
```

- `ASTᵗ` is the canonical AST annotated with types by the Algorithm W inferencer.
- Const evaluation mutates the AST when necessary (constant folding, generated
  declarations, intrinsic rewrites) and returns `ASTᵗ′`. The interpreter can
  infer missing types on demand, evaluate type-level expressions via the bridge,
  and registers any generated items with the incremental typer.
- `ASTᵗ′` is the authoritative programme for all downstream stages (HIRᵗ, MIR,
  LIR, transpilers).

## Const Block Semantics

```rust
const RESULT: i32 = {
    let x = 10;
    let y = 20;
    x + y
};
```

- Blocks execute during compilation using the AST interpreter in const mode.
- Evaluation observes principal types (`expr.ty`) inferred earlier.
- Intrinsics route through the shared registry and consult the
  `TypeQueryEngine` without synthesising intermediate representations.
- Structural edits (new structs, impls, generated functions) update the AST and
  promote any provisional `mut type` tokens to concrete entries.

### Compile-time Generation (overview)

Const evaluation may synthesize runtime code based on compile-time data. The
language provides dedicated keywords for quoting and splicing code, and a
convenience macro for emission. See `docs/Quoting.md` for full syntax and
semantics of `quote`, `splice`, and `emit!`.

### Advanced Patterns

```rust
const DEBUG_CONFIG: Config = {
    let mut cfg = Config::new();

    if cfg!(debug_assertions) {
        cfg.log_level = LogLevel::Debug;
        cfg.enable_tracing = true;
    }

    cfg
};
```

```rust
const STRUCT_INFO: StructInfo = {
    StructInfo {
        size: sizeof!(Point),
        field_count: field_count!(Point),
        has_z: hasfield!(Point, "z"),
    }
};
```

```rust
const GENERATED: Type = {
    struct GeneratedPoint { x: f64, y: f64 }

    if ENABLE_3D {
        struct GeneratedPoint { z: f64 }
    }

    impl GeneratedPoint {
        fn magnitude(&self) -> f64 {
            (self.x * self.x + self.y * self.y).sqrt()
        }
    }

    GeneratedPoint
};
```

## Evaluation Pipeline

1. **Type foundation**
   - Parse and normalise the AST, then initialize the incremental type
     environment (predeclare items, prepare query hooks).
   - The interpreter requests type info as needed, using the same Algorithm W
     solver, can resolve missing symbols by materialising const-generated
     items, and can execute type-level expressions via the bridge when the
     typer needs runtime assistance.

2. **Const execution**
   - Build dependency order from the typed AST (const items, const blocks,
     generated symbols).
   - Execute blocks using the AST interpreter in const mode.
   - Promote `mut type` tokens and persist structural edits.

3. **Commit**
   - Merge evaluated values back into the AST.
   - Emit diagnostics using the shared `DiagnosticManager`.
   - Persist `.ast-eval` artefacts when `--save-intermediates` is enabled.

## Emission and Quoting

For emission and quoting/splicing semantics (context, captures, control flow,
diagnostics), see `docs/Quoting.md`. Const evaluation executes those operations
and commits the resulting `ASTᵗ′` but does not redefine their behaviour here.

## Quoting and Splicing (pointer)

- `quote` captures code as a hygienic AST value (compile-time only).
- `splice` inserts a previously quoted fragment into the current AST.
- Both contribute to `ASTᵗ′` during const evaluation.

Full details and examples: `docs/Quoting.md`.

Use `emit!` for simple “write this block into the runtime body.” Use
`quote`/`splice` when you need to treat code as data (store, transform, compose
fragments) before insertion. See `docs/Quoting.md` for full semantics.

## Determinism and Staging

- All const expressions and structural edits must be acyclic. The interpreter
  evaluates const items/blocks in a topologically sorted order derived from
  their dependencies (names and types they reference).
- An emission or splice cannot reference results from a later stage; such
  cross‑stage references produce a compile‑time diagnostic.
- Repeated evaluation with identical inputs yields identical `ASTᵗ′` snapshots.

## Diagnostics

- Cycle or cross‑stage reference during const evaluation → error with a cycle
  report.
- Illegal side effects or capability violations during const execution →
  compile‑time diagnostics from the interpreter.

## Comparison

| Aspect             | Const Block (ASTᵗ)               | Regular Code                  |
|--------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Execution time     | Compile time                     | Runtime                       |
| Allowed functions  | Pure / const-compatible          | All                           |
| Structural edits   | Written into ASTᵗ′               | N/A                           |
| Scope              | Block-local                      | Module/function               |
| Type information   | Inferred AST annotations          | Runtime reflection (if any)   |
| Failure handling   | Compile-time diagnostics         | Runtime errors/exceptions     |

## Artefacts

With `--save-intermediates`, const evaluation writes the post-eval snapshot as
`*.ast-eval`. Downstream tooling will consume this snapshot directly once the
new typed HIR/MIR pipeline is reinstated.

## Summary

- Const evaluation and runtime interpretation share the same AST interpreter with
  different configuration flags.
- The typed AST is the single source of truth; THIR is no longer produced.
- Intrinsic handling and type queries operate through shared resolver/query
  infrastructure, with a bridge for type-level evaluation when required.
